You can change various preferences for the plugin.

The preferences dialog can be reached via _OpenCPN Options > Plugins >
Radar > Preferences_ or via the PPI menu _Advanced > Preferences_.

It looks like this:

image::preferences.png[Preferences]

== Range units

You can choose Nautical Miles, Mixed or Kilometers. Not all radars
support all types, in which case this setting will not change the
reported settings.

== GPU drawing method

You can choose between two types of drawing the picture; Vertex Array
and Shader. Depending on the hardware and OS it is possible that one
performs better than the other. Shader will perform the same regardless
of how ``busy'' the radar picture is, whereas Vertex Array will use more
CPU when there is more to draw. Also, Shader draws a little more
``soft'' image on most devices.

== Control Menu Auto Hide

If you have a small display, or just prefer it that way, you can make
the _Control Menu_ dialog disappear automatically if you are not using
it. You then need to access it by pressing the _Menu_ area on the PPI
window or via the _Context_ menu (right mouse button.)

== Guard zone styling

Depending on the colors and transparency it can be hard to see where the
guard zones are. Change the styling of the guard zones to fix this.

== Guard zone sound

If you don’t like the woman’s voice announcing a guard zone, you can
change the alert sound, as well as the repetition time of such alarms
when they are not confirmed.

== Colors

You can change the color palette for Target trails, Targets, and the
Radar PPI window background and AIS targets.

== Options

You can choose whether to: * Ignore any radar heading passed in via
RI10/11 (Navico Broadband only) * Pass RI10/11 radar heading to OpenCPN
(Navico Broadband only) * Enable COG as heading, allows overlay when you
do not have a compass heading input * Reverse the mouse wheel zoom
direction

You can choose the following display options: * Show ring at extreme
range, allows you to see the exact maximum range that the radar is
producing * Show guard zones on overlay * Show target trails on overlay
* Show data (such as guard zones) on overlay when radar is standby

And lastly, you can re-select your radar types.
