indexmenu_n_4

== Debugging

=== Navico Broadband Radar Debugging

=== What to do if it does not work

Of course you updated to the newest version first? +
Recent versions show this message dialog if not all conditions to show a
radar image are met:

image:../../../../manual/plugins/br24_radar/br24_overlay_messages.png[image,width=362,height=204]

==== No boat position

Check your GPS interface and/or NMEA inputs.

==== No heading

No compass data found. Check the NMEA inputs for HDT, HDM or HDG
sentences. HDT is preferred. If none are available COG is used if the
boat is travelling, but this is very bad for the overlay. Get a compass!

==== No radar present

Is the system connected to the radar, either directly or via switch?
Does the IP address of the network device show up in the “ZeroConf”
line?

If the radar does not transmit radar data but it is detected then the
“Radar present” line will get a checkmark and the text will change to
“Radar IP <ip-addr>”. Check that this is the correct IP address. If the
system does not show the IP address of the ethernet device that is on
the same network as your radar, check your ethernet configuration.

If the radar transmits data the dialog will change to the controls
dialog, but the log file will still show the information such as IP
address.

==== Everything looks OK but still no picture

If you get the normal radar control dialog and the little 'light' in the
radar button shows green, but you still do not get a picture, you can
use the radar _emulator_.

The emulator was created for debugging during development, but it can be
used to check that your OpenGL driver is compatible and whether your
system performs well enough. It uses (almost) the same code path as the
normal UDP reception of radar data, but 'invents' an artificial radar
image in 'standalone' mode.

In the preferences dialog (_Options > Plugins > BR24Radar >
Preferences_) choose _Display Option_ for _Radar display_ as _Emulator_
and close the preferences and options dialogs. You should now see a
picture like this, even if you have fulfilled none of the overlay
requirements:

image:../../../../manual/plugins/br24_radar/br24_emulator.png[image,width=382,height=308]

=== Firewall

Most issues so far that we have been asked to look in to were related to
a _firewall_ preventing the plugin to access the network at will,
especially for Microsoft Windows users. Please try again with your
firewall switched off completely. If it works without the firewall, just
add a rule in the firewall that allows _opencpn.exe_ full access. Most
consumer grade firewalls do not allow sufficient control over multicast
settings.

=== Multiple ethernet devices

The Navico radar continuously sends out its status, and it tries to
locate such a message. Since the plugin doesn't know which ethernet
device it should use it loops over the list of active devices until it
receives such a status message, and then uses that device until it
looses the connection, at which point it starts searching again.

This algorithm has been developed for the situation where a radar may be
on one ethernet device (a USB Ethernet dongle) one moment and a
different ethernet device (a Thunderbolt Ethernet converter attached to
a docking station) the next moment. This is useful as it allows you to
keep OpenCPN running for days at a time without restarting, and it will
still be able to use the radar when the tablet is docked or wired to the
network, without stopping OpenCPN when using the tablet in a wireless
fashion.

Although the software tries to detect automatically which ethernet
device the radar is using there are still situations where this breaks.
In particular this will matter most when the OS requires the plugin to
set the proper IP address on the multicast output data and the plugin
chooses the wrong IP address. This will surface as a situation where the
radar is detected but it cannot be turned on.

The following situations are examples of such setups:

* When you have a bridged network over two devices and it accidentally
binds to one of the underlying devices (which, because of Murphy, will
be the wrong one). This should only occur when the underlying device has
an IPv4 address which (because it is bridged) it should not have. The
plugin should use the bridge device only.
* When you have a virtual ethernet device that passes the multicast data
from the radar on to the plugin but does not pass multicast send data
from the plugin to the radar.
* When you have both a wired and a wireless network connected to the
radar network.

To see if this is the case please check the list of ethernet devices
using ipconfig / ifconfig (command line) or GUI control panel (MS Win),
network manager (Linux) / System preferences (OS X). Disable all devices
except for the one that the radar is connected to. If it works now,
enable the other devices one by one and restart OpenCPN after each
attempt. Once you locate the network that is interfering, determine
whether it has a correct IPv4 address. It should be on a different
network as that of the ethernet device where the radar is connected to.

Note that devices that have _no_ IPv4 address (not even a self-assigned
one) or have a _loopback_ address (starts with 127) will never interfere
and do not need to be disabled.

=== Verbose logging to file

Use the following to increase the amount of logging to the opencpn.log
file:

. Click on the question mark in the button bar and note where the ini
file (and log file) are kept.
. Stop OpenCPN.
. Edit the ini file and change the _VerboseLog_ in the
[Plugins/BR24radar] section to a number higher than 0. Values from 1 to
4 are different. At level 4 your file will grow very quickly!
. Start OpenCPN.
. Start the radar (or attempt to do so.)
. Stop OpenCPN.
. Check the content of the logfile. You may also be asked to upload this
file to a location that it can be examined.

link:../br24_radar.html#hardware_installation[⇒Back to BR24 Hardware
installation]
